Title: The Scholar's Review: 15 July 2017
Date: 2017-07-15
Tags: r, rstudio, economist, finance
Category: tsr
Slug: tsr_15jul2017
Summary: In this week's post we catch up on old news from Economist (e.g., the economy is about to collapse), ponder the mereological significance of information quanta, and ask if the name "Praise-God Barebone" is novel. Also, Go Carolina! Hail Eris!

>I have no data yet. It is a capital mistake to theorise before one has data. Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit theories, instead of theories to suit facts.

>---Arthur Conan Doyle

# Chips from a Cambridge Workshop

## Hedgehogs vs Foxes

An ancient Greek [adage](http://www.wikiwand.com/en/The_Hedgehog_and_the_Fox) states: "a fox knows many things, but a hedgehog knows one important thing." With no additional context, the adage simply bifurcates styles of epistemology without ascribing an upper-hand to either condition. Recently, however, I've seen the phrase used to describe winners and losers in the race for better, data-based predictions.

Philip Tetlock has centered his research on assessing and improving forecasts and makes clear his preference for foxes. His book *Superforecasters*, for example, details everyday people who consistently make better predictions regarding a wide range of world events than most experts. One reason for their success is their nearly obsessive collection of eclectic knowledge, making them "supernewsjunkies". The core idea being that a critical quantity of information quanta can reveal patterns not recognized by large, over-arching narratives.

If you were to predict the future of oil prices, for example, would an intimate knowledge of OPEC's history be all you need for accuracy? Or would you need to know how China's aging population might affect aggregate demand for oil? Or what the median waterline on shipping vessels across the Pacific might reveal about global oil usage? What about CFOs who successfully hedge shale companies, keeping them afloat during a glut of oil? Many small details might give you an insight missed by the standard narrative.

Tetlock is not alone. Nate Silver in his book *The Signal and the Noise* also espouses a fox-outlook. His noted website [538](http://www.fivethirtyeight.com) subtly alludes to this with its fox logo.

## The Puritan Ban on Novelty

Any English speaking society that would think a name like "Praise-God Barebone" was a fine name, is probably a little strange. Perhaps the most innovative aspect of the Puritans (of which Praise-God was a member) was their ability to be strange and old-fashioned at the same time (after all, anyone can be new and strange). The Puritans were obsessed with keeping things the way they were. As David Hackett Fischer points out in *Albion's Seed*,

>"In the early records of the Bay Colony, the adjectives 'new' and 'novel were pejorative terms.' In 1639, for example, a special 'day of humiliation' was called in Massachusetts on account of 'novelties, oppression, atheism, exesse, superfluity, idleness, contempt of authority...'"

Fischer notes that novelty is first in the list --- even ahead of atheism. It seems odd to us in our ever-innovating, fast-paced society that even the most conservative person would prefer no change at all. Fischer suggests that part of their desire to keep things the way they were (are?) was to preserve a memory of their lost home in England. This could also explain why colonial Virginians (a slightly less fanatical population) also considered words like 'innovation,' 'novelty,' and 'modern' to be pejorative terms.

But wouldn't a strange name like "Praise-God" be novel? A common naming convention for the Puritans was to simply open the Bible at random and point to a word. So in a sense there is nothing new at all about---God chose the name, at random, from the book he wrote several hundred years ago.

More widely, I wonder how much of the progression of our knowledge of earth's history has also impacted our view of innovation. Until very recently (the 19th c. in fact), the idea that a species could go extinct was patently absurd. The world is as it was when God created it. If the world is as we know now constantly in flux, then it is no great leap to embrace the change we inevitably must experience.

# Tech Talk

## RStudio Add-ins

A newish feature to RStudio are [addins](https://rstudio.github.io/rstudioaddins/). These addins add a bit of convenient functionality to RStudio. For example, the base examples include an addin that can easily prettify `R` code.

A few other useful addins I have found:

* [copydat](https://github.com/BAAQMD/copydat): easily copy dataframes to clipboard
* [radiant](https://github.com/radiant-rstats/radiant.data): explore data; like a light version of [Exploratory](https://exploratory.io)
* [ggedit](https://github.com/metrumresearchgroup/ggedit): interactively edit ggplots
* [strcode](https://github.com/lorenzwalthert/strcode): insert code break chunks
* [alignassign](https://github.com/seasmith/AlignAssign): align code at assignment operators
* [citr](https://github.com/crsh/citr): search and add bibtex citations.

If you have `devtools` installed in `R` then you can run the following code to install all of the above packages:

```r
install_github("rstudio/addinexamples", type = "source")
install_github("BAAQMD/copydat")
install.packages("radiant", repos = "https://radiant-rstats.github.io/minicran/", type = "binary")
install.packages('ggedit')
install_github("lorenzwalthert/strcode")
  install_github("seasmith/AlignAssign")
install.packages("citr")
```

## Stata Code: Monthly Mean

I recently wrote some [code](https://github.com/tkthomas27/stata_code/blob/master/mean_obs_summary.do) that can take a Stata dataset and produce a table with means and number of observations by variable and time series. The code is essentially agnostic to the data so long as all variables are wanted in the table and are numeric.

## New Mac Lineup Announced
In early June, Apple held its annual developer conference were it announced a new lineup of computers. The price drop in MacBooks makes the Pro more reasonable, but the lack of 32gb RAM is unforgivable (some of us like loading huge datasets in `R`!). The touchbar is pretty cool, but I am not willing to pay the premium that it added to the price when it was first announced in 2016. The new iMac Pro, on the other hand, looks ridiculous, but I'm not really sure who it is for outside of Premiere Pro users.  

# Economist Digest

[**Super Valuation of Amazon**](https://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21719487-amazon-has-potential-meet-expectations-investors-success-will-bring-big): All you need to know about Amazon's current price is this: "Never before has a company been worth so much for so long while making so little money: 92% of its value is due to profits expected after 2020." For Amazon to justify it's current price, it would have to become the most profitable company of all time. Is it possible?

The biggest hurdle for Amazon will be regulatory not economic. As the Economist continually points out, current regulations regarding monopolies and the like are outdated for times when custom data and smart algorithms can competitively set prices that normally would only appear under monopolies. Eventually regulations will catch up and Amazon as we know it might become multiple Amazon-lets.

[**Vix**](https://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21722181-low-level-popular-measure-volatility-causes-alarm-markets-are) is the implied premium of insuring options against volatility in the markets. Over the past few months, Vix has been surprisingly low---and some fear it is the calm before the storm. This complacency prior to disaster seems to quantify an old trend of saying "the business cycle has been tamed---no more recessions" right before a financial crisis. Speaking of which...

[**Cape Fear**](https://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21721649-american-share-valuations-are-higher-now-eve-financial): Right before the financial crisis of 2007, Ben Bernanke assured everyone that the looming housing crisis would be contained. We know how that ended. Ten years on and we've now just reached the same CAPE (cyclically adjusted price to earnings) ratio that we had in May 2007. Does this mean that equites are valued to high? The Shiller 10-year PE [suggests](http://www.multpl.com/shiller-pe/) that were about 10 percentage points above the historically observed median. However, if realized returns are a bad predictor of future returns, then how much should we trust these signals of another recession?

[**Akzovism**](https://www.economist.com/news/business/21721953-activist-funds-have-moved-being-gobby-bad-boys-markets-bosss-guide-fending): Shades of Airgas with an somewhat beleaguered industrial company rebuffing multiple takeovers and then being assailed by activists. The interesting turn here is the unique corporate governance structure wherein a foundation appoints board members thus negating attempts to vote in new slate of sympathetic directors.

[**Toshiba Delisting**](https://www.economist.com/news/business/21722233-japans-government-wants-fend-asian-potential-buyers-embattled-toshiba-tries-sell-its): Seemingly every month another titanic Japanese company begins to die off. Toshiba is under threat of delisting, Sharp is in trouble, and Takata just sold itself. But does this mean that Shinzo Abe's economic reforms are failing, or is the greater accountability a sign of its success?

# Sport

## College Ball

Crazy to think a year ago, Clemson and North Carolina both lost championship games only to make it back and win the next year (if only the Panthers could have joined the party...). Clemson played heroically against a superior Alabama team; Carolina, however, played terribly for most of the tournament yet somehow ended up winning. This is particularly impressive given how soft they looked for the past few years. Outside of Brice Johnson, there was just no toughness or aggression (except for Isaiah Hicks ability to foul out almost immediately).

In another bit of interesting parallel championship news, Luke Maye's (who hit the game winner against Kentucky and sent me into a berzerker-like frenzy) brother won the championship in the College Baseball World Series only a few months after his brother.

# Entertainment

## Reading

* *Urth of the New Sun*: finished; what a strange book. I'm not sure I have any idea what happened. The language was certainly not as floral as previous books in the series, but the actions and significance were incredibly obscure. Most of the time I had no idea what was happening. That being said, I can totally see this being the next big HBO show to fill in after Game of Thrones.
* *Illuminatus*: half way through; what a strange and hilarious book. One of the funniest I've ever read. Hail Eris!
* *The Lost World*: almost done; what a strange combination of under-developed writing and thought provoking monologues. It definitely feels like Crichton really wasn't into the dino-terror part and just wanted to talk about evolution and extinction. Also interesting how much the movie deviates from the book since Crichton had to rush the book out before the next movie.

## Watching

Having a newborn means you can't sleep but you're too tired to work. So what do you do? Bing watch:

* *Spaced*: Absolutely hilarious. Edgar Wright's first big project is one of the funniest TV shows I've seen.
* *Star Trek: The Next Generation*: First season, not so great. Interesting to see that Rob Bowman (who directed many classic *X-Files* episodes) directed a lot of the first two seasons.
* *Logan*: I thought it was great if not a little too comically violent for the tone it was going for. But it is a fitting send off and one that certainly respects the characters.
* *BvS:DoJ*: The beginning of this movie is hilarious. A man standing in an office watching the entire city get destroyed around gets a call from his boss telling him he should leave the building. Why does someone need to tell you that! The world is clearly ending!
* *MST3K*: I think the new MST3K is superior to old one. I said it.
* *Hacksaw Ridge*: Hugo Weaving could have won an Oscar for his performance but his accent is out of control.

## Listening

* *Innovators*: finished; actually pretty epic in scope and detail. One of the big takeaways was how different the internet could have been (e.g., anonymity could have been banned).
* *Misbehaving*: almost finished; a history of behavioral economics from Richard Thaler's point of view. As someone who works in academia, it is interesting to see how fraught the advancement of new field is.
* *Revisionist History*: a new podcast by Malcolm Gladwell --- pretty good! The topics are quite eclectic which suits me just fine!
