Title: The Scholar's Review: 29 January 2017
Date: 2017-01-28
Tags: biology, history, europe, r markdown, hackers, football, trade
Category: tsr
Slug: tsr_29jan2017
Summary: In this weeks issue, we talk about the history of the name "Charles," R Markdown Notebooks, Princeton's ridiculous national football championship claims, *The Book of the New Sun*, and the fading of multinational corporations. Watch were you step though! We're first going to take a walk through Kary Mullis' *mindfield*.

>“Languages build up to reflect specializations in a way of life. Each specialization may be recognized by its words, by its assumptions and sentence structures. Look for stoppages. Specializations represent places where life is being stopped, where the movement is dammed up and frozen.”
>-- Frank Herbert, *Children of Dune*


# Chips from a Cambridge Workshop

## Dancing Naked in the Mindfield: The Kary Mullis Story

Things that describe Kary Mullis:

* Avid surfer
* Denier of HIV-Aids link
* Married four times
* Winner of Nobel Prize
* Avid user of LSD
* Encountered glowing green raccoon (possibly extraterrestrial)

One of these is not like the other...

The work of Lenoir, NC-born Kary Mullis has had an enduring, epoch-defining influence on biology in spite of his unusual predilections and controversial views,. In particular, his Nobel-prize winning work on polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was "highly original and significant, virtually dividing biology into the two epochs of before P.C.R. and after P.C.R."[^1]

PCR is essentially a "kind of genetic photocopying, and it became the basis for all subsequent genetic science, from academic studies to police forensic work."[^2] PCR relies on breaking done DNA and assembling a new copy of the strand with the help of heat-resistant polymerase.[^3] The end result of repeated applications are multiple copies of the original DNA strand. You can immediately see how this could be useful in forensic science: just a single hair fiber is now more than enough to produce sufficient DNA to test for comparisons to suspects.

As for Kary Mullis, well... maybe his autobiography is the best source of information: [*Dancing Naked in the Mindfield*](https://www.amazon.com/Dancing-Naked-Mind-Field-Mullis/dp/0679774009/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1486654696&sr=8-1&keywords=kary+mullis).  

## Char Le Magne

We all know Charlemagne: King of the Franks, First Holy Roman Emperor, coronated on Christmas Day in 800 CE. But what about Karl der Grosse? Or Carolus Magnus? This isn't a mere translation issue --- the equivalency of these two names points towards the fundamental similitude of Germany and France as well as the nearly universal appearance of the name "Charles."

So Germany and France hate each other (see World War II, World War I, Franco-Prussian War... you know what --- just check out the wikipedia page on the [French-German Enmity](http://www.wikiwand.com/en/French–German_enmity)). The EU was essentially founded to prevent another World War between the two --- they even gave the Nobel Prize to themselves for so bravely refraining from war for a few decades. With this in mind, it's a little awkward that France and Germany are historically the same. This issue is only possible because, until 1871, Germany wasn't even a country and was more a general cultural idea.

Historically, France is a part of this idea --- the Franks (France and Frankfurt, Germany) were a collection of Germanic tribes occupying the continental Europe north of the Alps. The most famous of the Franks (apologies to [Pepin](http://www.wikiwand.com/en/Pepin_the_Short)) is known almost exclusively by his French name Charlemagne (Char le Magne) despite that his name was actually Karl (Karl der Grosse). Add this to to wiki on "French-German Enmity."

I remember thinking that it was pretty neat when I finally realized Charlemagne's name is quite obviously "Charles the Great." Investigating the relation between Charles, Char, and Karl, you quickly find an expansive list of other Karl derivatives: Carolina (North Carolina is named after Charles I, King of England), Charlotte (the city is named after the queen consort of George III), Caroline, Carla, Carl, Charlene, Carol, Carolyn, and Carlos.


# Tech Tips

R Markdown [Notebooks](http://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/r_notebooks.html) is a new feature for RStudio that allows for independent and interactive chunk execution, quick rendering of LaTeX, and selective updating of html files (i.e., the entire page does not have to re-rendered each time). This is a very cool advancement in literate programming that takes the best features of iPython notebooks and applies it to a R development environment.

My continuing [notes](https://github.com/tkthomas27/ISL-Notes) on the *Introduction to Statistical Learning* showoff some of these features.

* Full Markdown capabilities
* The ability to reference defined variables with \`r <variable>\`
* See plots displayed below chunks.
* See Tex code rendered as you go. The following will be automatically displayed as you type.

```tex
$$
	\begin{equation}
	\begin{split}
		E[(Y - \hat{Y})^2] &= E[(f(X) + \epsilon - \hat{f}(X))^2]\\
		&= \underset{Reducible}{[f(X) - \hat{f}(X)]^2} + \underset{Irreducible}{Var(\epsilon)}
	\end{split}
	\end{equation}
$$
```
I highly recommend you try it out. Reading about the features is quite underwhelming compared to seeing it in action.

To start a notebook you need to save a file as `.Rmd` and add a header like this:

```r
---
title: "Notebook Title"
output:
  html_notebook:
    toc: true
    number_sections: true
  pdf_document: default
---
```

This will produce a PDF document with a table of contents and numbered sections.

# Economist Digest

From the [January 28, 2017 edition](http://www.economist.com/printedition/2017-01-28)

*The Multinational Company: In Retreat*: Multinationals, which account for a third of the world's stock markets, are increasingly posting anemic performance results with declining profits and plunging ROE. The cause of this fall is that the opportunities that multinationals exploited in the international market are being "massaged" away: income is rising in the third world, mismatched tax treaties are being synchronized, and local firms are becoming more sophisticated. With a current rise in anti-globalism, the future direction and scale of multinationals are in question.

More articles:

* *Replacing Obamacare: High Risk by Name*: The alternative to the ACA that Republicans are touting relies on high-risk pools. High-risk pools gather all the unhealthy people into a single tranche and charges them higher premiums, thus allowing healthier people to not subsidize the cost of less healthy people. The problem is, of course, that healthy people do end up subsidizing the unhealthy because the high-risk pools require extensive government backing which is turn funded by tax payers.

* New favorite term is the *Herbal Tea Party* --- the liberal version of the conservative Tea Party.

* *Trade War Scenario: Apocalypse Now*: Donald Trump's suggested 45% tariff on imported good's from China would end up hitting the poorest the hardest because they buy the most tradable goods. Such a tariff wouldn't be the end of the world but would be quite uncomfortable for many.

* *The Academy and the Marketplace: Mathematical Transformations*: Speaking of globablization, a recent paper has studied the impact of the liberalization of China following Mao's death and the disintegration of the USSR on employment and productivity of math PhDs. The findings support that unemployment increased with the large influxes of both populations.

# Sport

**'Member when...**

* Maybe it shouldn't be surprising that Princeton, the first football program, claims the most national titles at 29 --- none of which occurred since 1950. Just to give you an idea of how ridiculous this idea is, Princeton's first 7 national titles were won with with a total of 11 wins. Princeton claims national titles for years 1870 and 1872 were there final record was 1-0.
* Yes this is ridiculous, but remember that a mere 90 years later, the Boston Celtics were winning multiple championships in a 8-team NBA.

# Entertainment

**Watching**

* *Parks and Rec*: The campaign of Leslie Knope, a blonde woman who is unsubstantially and viciously attacked while she runs against a wealthy, bumbling, narcissistic imbecile, is spookily prescient.

**Listening**

* *X-Files-Files with Kumail Nanjiani*: An interesting factoid from Chris Weitz (writer of *American Pie* and *Rogue One*) is that directors are not allowed to direct extras too much (or at all) without paying them more (I guess at some point they transcend being a mere extra and advance to featured extra who gets paid more).
* *Hacker's: Heroes of the Computer Revolution* by Steve Levy, cont'd: A recurring topic is the "Hacker Ethic" centering on the freedom of information and devotion to exploration. Levy breaks his history into three parts: software hackers (MIT crew), hardware hackers (guys in California building personal computers), and game hackers (a third generation were the Hacker Ethic, like the light of the First Men of Numenor, is utterly diminished).


**Reading**

* *The Book of the New Sun* by Gene Wolfe: My anchor of reference for this book is *Hyperion* given that I just finished that a few weeks ago. So far very similar in quality of prose and world building, and I highly enjoy it. I decided to make a list of words I had never heard before. For now, I'll leave this [lamp-shade](http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/LampshadeHanging): "He mispronounced quite common words: urticate, salpinx, bordereau."


[^1]: [Kary Mullis](http://www.wikiwand.com/en/Kary_Mullis)
[^2]: Bill Bryson. “A Short History of Nearly Everything: Special Illustrated Edition
[^3]: An interesting side note is the discovery of this polymerase. It was first found in a bacteria living in Emerald Pond, Yosemite National Park living in thermal conditions far beyond what was thought possible for a living thing to be found in at the time.
