Title: The Scholar's Review: 22 January 2017
Date: 2017-01-22
Tags: python, philosophy, nfl, x-files, econ, movies, trade
Category: tsr
Slug: tsr_22jan2017
Summary: In this issue we cover Zhuangzi, micro-parties, some Python tips, and zombie companies. We also share some thoughts about Scorcese's *Silence*, the 2007 Kansas Jayhawks football team, and the X-files.

>When Lawrence understood, it was as if the math teacher had suddenly played the good part of Bach’s Fantasia and Fugue in G Minor on a pipe organ the size of the Spiral Nebula in Andromeda—the part where Uncle Johann dissects the architecture of the Universe in one merciless descending ever-mutating chord, as if his foot is thrusting through skidding layers of garbage until it finally strikes bedrock.
> -- Neal Stephenson, *Cryptonomicon*

<!--  -->

>His outfit is a little bizarre. I thought he was a performer of some sort when I first came in, although I tried not to imagine the nature of his act.
>-- John Kennedy Toole, *A Confederacy of Dunces*


# Chips from a Cambridge Workshop

## Butterfly Dreams

In this classic [story](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zhuangzi_(book)#.22The_Butterfly_Dream.22), the Chinese sage Zhuangzi (ca. 370 BCE) awakes from dreaming that he was a butterfly only to ask the question: am I a man dreaming of being a butterfly or am I a butterfly dreaming of being a man? Daoists, scholars, philosophers, poets, artists, and laymen alike have all been equally moved by so profound yet so simple of a question. Although the concept has been [elaborated and explored](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dream_argument) numerous times (there are certainly [more](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vasubandhu) and [less](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meditations_on_First_Philosophy) sophisticated takes on the idea), I believe Zhuangzi's simple story has staying power due to its simultaneous depth and shallowness. The very form of the story, incredibly simple yet profound in implications, underlines the point that distinctions between deep and shallow --- between anything in fact --- is ultimately fruitless.

## Roman Yin-Yang

The earliest known representation of the [Yin-Yang](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taijitu) is not from China but from the late Roman Empire (ca. 430). The [*Notitia Dignitatum*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Notitia_Dignitatum), which "details the administrative organization of the Eastern and Western Empires," includes a depiction of the shield carrying a Yin-Yang symbol.

So does this mean China and Europe were trading ideas a millennium before the colonial period? Of course! Asia and Europe have been in contact for a [long](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sino-Roman_relations#Embassy_to_Augustus), [long](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Periplus_of_the_Erythraean_Sea) time. But *Notitia* is not the smoking gun. The current version of the *Notitia* is actually a Medieval copy of an ancient document --- meaning that it's about 1000 years younger than the 430 date.

## Australian Motoring Enthusiasts Party

The [Australian Motoring Enthusiast Party](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Australian_Motoring_Enthusiast_Party) is a micro political party that remarkably won federal representation in 2013. Let's review a few spectacular facts from this Australian [news article](http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-06-30/australian-motoring-enthusiasts-party-ricky-muir-begins-senate/5561076):

* The Senator representing AMEP, Ricky Muir, is a 32-year-old former timber worker
* Mr. Muir only won .51% of the primary vote
* Mr. Muir will make $190,000 a year --- $16,000 more than a US Senator
* The party has no clear stances on any topic outside of anti-hoon regulations (FYI: hoon refers to making crazy car modifications and/or performing dangerous maneuvers in the street.)

This is not an irrelevant [incident](http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21695553-prime-minister-threatens-early-election-bid-stamp-his-authority-turnbulls-big-gamble): in 2016, "eight senators representing tiny parties... hold the balance of power [in the Australian Senate]." Nor is it isolated: in 2016, the [Pirate Party](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pirate_Party_(Iceland)) won 10 seats in the [Althing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Althing). Ultimately, this represents a potential pitfall of the Parlimentary system (a system that many Americans would like to try out given the current two-party deadlock in America.)

# Tech Tips

As someone who started with Stata and R for data analysis, I've always wanted to try a more general use language like Python. I worked through [Python the Hard Way](https://learnpythonthehardway.org) and played around with [Dataquest](https://www.dataquest.io) (whose [tips](https://www.dataquest.io/blog/how-to-setup-a-data-science-blog/) helped me build this blog). However, the best way of learning I have found is writing algorithms in Python.

Two of the cooler functions I have come across are [zip](https://docs.python.org/3.3/library/functions.html#zip) and [pop](https://docs.python.org/2/tutorial/datastructures.html#more-on-lists). `zip` essentially allows you to iterate over two iterables simultaneously. A trivial example would be

```python
x = [1,2,3]
y = [4,5,6]

for i,j in zip(x,y):
  print(i,j)
```
the output would be `[1,4],[2,5][3,6]`. I can't think of how much time this simple function would have saved me if it was available in Stata.

`list.pop[i]` is like the opposite of `append`: it removes the specified element from the list. This might sound simple, but it is by far the easiest way of removing something from a list that I have come across in R or Stata. My first use of `pop` came in writing the [inversion counting algorithm](https://github.com/tkthomas27/stanford_algos/blob/master/course1/count_inversions.py). Here is a snippet (`B` and `C` are both arrays of numbers):

```python
while B and C:
    if B[0] <= C[0]:
        outlist.append(B.pop(0))
    else:
        count += len(B)
        outlist.append(C.pop(0))
```
This chunk of code does the following:

1. Checks if element 0 of `B` is less than or equal to element 0 of `C`
2. If it is, then it removes that element from `B` and places it into `outlist`
3. If it is not, then it increases `count` by the number of elements left in `B` (this is part of the counting inversions) and then removes that element from `C` and places it into `outlist` (the effect is two sorted arrays)

# Economist Digest

From the [January 21, 2017 edition](http://www.economist.com/printedition/2017-01-21)

*Buttonwood*: This weeks Buttonwood column addresses one of the pitfalls of the current trend protectionist policies: shielding established yet failing companies from displacement by global competition. Specifically, a paper from the OECD finds that companies that owe more than the make (interest-coverage ratio of less than 1 and are over 10 years older) might be stifling growth and lowering labor productivity. These older, less profitable companies use their lobbying clout (leveraging their employment size, no doubt) to pressure their respective governments into passing protectionist policies. To be sure, however, this isn't a Right v Left issue: Sandernistas and Corbynistas alike were clamoring for anti-globalist policies as well.

* *Free Exchange: Tariff-eyeing Policy* takes a dive into the proposed tax reforms from the current administration including a look at Paul Ryan's proposed VAT system
* *Tata's Sons: Chandra's Challenge* gives an update on the current leadership challenges of Tata Group (*Hint: the not-Tata guy is out and Tata-guy is in*)
* *Cigarette Companies: Plucky Strike* drops the interesting fact that smoking is on the rise in Africa and Eastern Mediterranean
* *Asian-American Voters: Bulls in a China Shop* explores the ramifications of Chinese-American support for Donald Trump

# Sport

**NFL Conference Championship Games**

* The Patriots trounced the sleep-walking Steelers (I wonder how much that early morning wake call affected them). I guess this should have been predictable, but the Patriots really haven't played anyone recently so I though it would be closer. That being said, the Steelers implemented one of the worst gameplans in recent history by deciding to drop everyone in coverage and only sending a few rushers.
* Similarly, the Falcons demolished Green Bay in another snooze-fest. I still think Aaron Rodgers is technically the best QB in the NFL right now, but even he can't overcome the insane number of injuries they've had (particularly in the secondary.)

**College Basketball**

* Another great week of college ball. The ACC continually pumps out terrific matchups (see Florida State-Louisville). I think the storyline of the year so far is Duke team. I know Coach K is gone, but come on this team is stacked!

**'Member when...**

* Remember when Kansas won 12 games in 2007? And were ranked No.2 going into the last week of the season? Kansas hasn't won more than 12 games in the **past 6 seasons combined**. 2007 has and forever will be craziest year in college football.

# Entertainment

**Watching**

* *Silence*: Martin Scorcese's passion project about Jesuit priests in early-modern Japan was right in my wheel house. It was somber and slow (like a good Kurosawa film) and about a topic that I studied frequently during my time in at the Divinity School (that topic deserves it's own post). I particularly appreciated the absence of a mustache-twirling evil Jesuit missionary priest.
* *Parks and Rec*: an affable comedy series that feels a little before it's time given the current political climate.

**Listening**

* *X-Files-Files with Kumail Nanjiani*: This is a fun podcast about the X-Files with *Silicon Valley* star Kumail Nanjiani. It's pretty funny and appropriately intellectual given the excellent writing of the show. Some of his guests are quite good: Darin Morgan (Flukeman, writer of the best episodes of the X-Files), Glen Morgan (frequent writer for the X-Files, Darin's brother), Chris Weitz (writer of *About a Boy* and *Rogue One*), and Dan Harmon (*Rick and Morty*) to name a few. I vividly remember watching the X-Files as a kid on Friday/Sunday nights and it's been great reliving the zeitgeist of the moment.
* *Hacker's: Heroes of the Computer Revolution* by Steve Levy: This is a fun book about the history of hackers. So far I've finished the first part about the first hackers who grew out of the Tech Model Railroad Club at MIT. Also of note is the hacker hatred of IBM --- now that famous Ridley Scott-directed Apple commercial from the 1984 Super Bowl makes a lot more sense.

**Reading**

* *The Forever War* by Joe Haldeman: a mildly interesting but not very well written novel about a solider who, via time dilation effects of interstellar travel, lives over thousand years. Not terrible, but I'm not sure why this won so many awards.
* *The Book of the Dying Sun* by Gene Wolfe: on a recommendation from a friend I started reading this sci-fi fantasy novel. So far it is definitely better written than *The Forever War* and quite good at evocative imagery. I find his extensive blend of imaginary, literary, and archaic words particularly amusing.
