Title: The Scholar's Review: 12 February 2017
Date: 2017-02-12
Tags: scotch, dracula, movies, regulations, corporate governance
Category: tsr
Slug: tsr_12feb2017
Summary: In this issue we explore a few random facts about the ancient world, highlight a few articles from the *Economist* Technology Quarterly, as well as Joe Dimaggio's struggles with immigrant fears. We also discuss burdensome financial regulations and questionable corporate governance practices in tech IPO.

>I’m saying that at Leipzig all goods—silk, coins, shares in mines—lose their hard dull gross forms and liquefy, and give up their true nature, as ores in an alchemist’s furnace sweat mercury—and all mercury is mercury and can be freely swapped for mercury of like weight—indeed cannot be distinguished from it.

>---Neal Stephenson. “Quicksilver.”


# Chips from a Cambridge Workshop

## Iberia, Syria, and Germania

Here are few interesting factoids about names of places in the ancient world:

* Iberia in Roman times did not refer to the Iberian peninsula (modern day Spain and Portugal) but to a Kingdom (the first Christian kingdom in fact) centered on present day Georgia.

* The original province of Syria is approximately present day Syria. However, following the Bar Kokhba revolt, Hadrian (who really, really hated the Jews) merged Judaea into Syria to create the province Syria-Palestine. He also renamed Jerusalem Aelia Capitolina.

* The name "Germania" is of unknown origin, probably a Gaulish term appropriated by the Romans. It is appropriate then that only non-Germans call Germany "Germany" and native Germans refer to it as Deutschland. The "Deutsch" part of Deutschland is ultimately from the PIE root "teuta" meaning "people." This root is origin of the word "Teutons" as well as the Italian word for German, "tedesco." [Wikipedia](http://www.wikiwand.com/en/Names_of_Germany) makes the interesting point of contrasting the word for "people" with the opposite word "walesc" used to indicate "foreigner." This word has been applied to the Welsh (who call themselves Cymry) as well as Wallonia (the Belgians who recently held the EU hostage in trade negotiations) and Wallachia (the home of Dracula).

# Tech Tips

From the [February 11, 2017 edition](http://www.economist.com/printedition/2017-02-11) of the Technology Quarterly

* *Entertainment: The Paradox of Choice*: In his book *The Long Tail*, Chris Anderson famously predicted that the winners in the coming digital entertainment revolution (think Netflix) would be the ones who provided the most customized, expansive, and rare collection. Essentially, whatever service could lay claim to the most hard to get titles would be the winners. This has not proven to be the case. It seems that the easier it is to get things that were once rare (I remember scouring Best Buys for any copy of Kurosawa that I can now watch on youtube for free) people more and more want the biggest names in TV and movies. The winners it seems, are those who can get stream *The Force Awakens* and not *Rashomon*. (In hindsight this seems pretty obvious.)

* *Recommendation Algorithms*: In statistics, we obsess over the bias-variance tradeoff. When algorithms meet people, however, the tradeoff is explore-exploit. You could simply keep recommending things you know for sure that customers like, but this runs the risk of overfitting and failing to adapt to the vacillations of human desire. However, if you loosen your parameters to achieve lower errors when switching between human states, you might under-fit and the human will reject the recommendation as not applicable to them.

* *Alternative Realities*: The frictions involved in AR, VR, and Haptic immersion rigs (viz., they look stupid to wear and are uncomfortable) will probably limit their adoption to only those who play video games. Hence why I think the future is still in full eye replacements.

# Economist Digest

From the [February 11, 2017 edition](http://www.economist.com/printedition/2017-02-11)

* *Financial Regulation in America: The Litter of the Law*: From 2010-2016, "Dodd-Frank soaked up 73m paperwork hours and $36bn in costs." Small price to pay for the economic damage created by the financial industry in the Great Recession right? Maybe, but vengeance is not the point of the justice system and nor should it be the thrust of regulations. The idea of financial regulations is to act like the speed governor on your car. You should be able to drive to work any way you want but not at an extreme speed that would prove reckless to you or others. One proposed step in the article is to consolidate regulating agencies to lower the burden of compliance. Simplification, consolidation, and harmonization would make compliance more effective and help lower compliance costs for companies. However, if the continuing issues with IFRS-GAAP harmonization is any indication, this will probably never get done.

* *American Retailing: Run Ragged*: Retail is not the most thrilling field of research but it is a massive component of the economy and the gradual demise of storied franchises such as Macy's and Sears are certainly touchstones in the changing economic landscape of America. The future, it seems, is fast-fashion (Zara's, Uniqlo, Primark, etc.) and smaller stores.

* *Schumpeter: Snaptrap*: Now this is a thrilling topic of research: corporate governance. Snapchat's recent IPO (looking for a $20-25bn valuation) continues the trend toward diminished shareholder rights for companies going public (particularly tech companies). For Snap, the problem is acute: shareholder's buying into the IPO have no voting rights. Google and Facebook are similar with dual voting rights that divorces cashflow rights from voting rights. Alibaba's attempt to follow suit in their IPO lead to them listing with the NYSE after the HKSE rejected their corporate governance structure. So why are tech companies such avid fans of these patently undemocratic structures? One argument is that tech companies, given their dependence on forecasting the future and secretive R&D efforts, are more likely to have information that the market will be incapable of adequately pricing. Tech IPOs, by this argument, need to protect their interest from uninformed market forces.

# The Week in History

* February 7, 1497: The Bonfires of the Vanities occurred in Florence. TIL, this phrase refers to a historical event.

# Sport

## College Basketball

Duke-Carolina was of course a well-spirited game. Duke always seems to shoot hot when playing against Carolina and Carolina always seems to get everyone's best shot.

## 'Member when...

Joe Dimaggio's parents were classified as enemy aliens due to their immigration from Italy (a Axis power during WWII) and forbidden from traveling farther than a five miles from their home. It should also be noted that Dimaggio's own Italian heritage was controversial when he started playing in the major leagues.

# Entertainment

## Watching

* *Parks and Rec*: Recently I watched the episode were Ron Swanson goes on a trip to the Lagavulin distillery somewhere in the British Isles. I noticed, however, that the Lagavulin facility looked suspiciously like the Laphroaig distillery (I should know, I own several square feet of the Isle of Islay). Well, [turns out](http://www.wikiwand.com/en/Lagavulin_distillery) there is a reason for that: Lagavulin and Laphroaig are located near each other and Lagavulin was even sued for trying to copy Laphroaig.

## Listening

* *Hacker's: Heroes of the Computer Revolution* by Steve Levy, completed: Listening to the coda of the book and it's quite shocking to find out that the book was published in 1980s. The extensive time spent elaborating the Hacker Ethic of free information and anti locks and barriers is shockingly prescient.
* *Great Courses: Civl Liberties and the Bill of Rights*, started: I was pleased that the professor began the course by elaborating on the implications of the 14th Amendment and the gradual incorporation of the bill of rights across all levels of government (namely, state government). Most people don't realize that, as originally written and interpreted in the *Barron v Baltimore* case, the bill of rights only applies to the federal government.

## Reading

* *The Book of the Dying Sun* by Gene Wolfe: completed the first two books: Very well written with a mind-expanding vocabulary. I particularly enjoy Wolfe's lack of exposition. I recently read *Ready Player One* which clumsily jammed massive quantities of exposition down your throat and felt the need to explain every detail. I have an imagination, that's why I read sci-fi.
